---
title: 'Duncan Green on Social Norms: A Response'
excerpt: "Response to Duncan Green's ideas around changing social norms."
tags: dev social-norms work
categories: 
  - Dev Econ
---
* toc
{:toc}

# Duncan Green on Social Norms

Duncan Green has a new [blog
post](http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/what-do-aid-agencies-need-to-do-to-getting-serious-on-changing-social-norms/)
on how aid agencies can change 'social norms'. It stirred up a couple of
old debates I've had on social change and scope for external
interventions in them. I summarize the blog post and respond to it
below.

**Summary**: Aid agencies have gone too far in pushing for reform of
social norms via the legislature route without adequate social buy-in--
the current tide of populism and backlash against political correctness
indicate this. Analysis on **how to change norms should take as the
starting point the "… the moments in people’s lives when norms are
formed or reformed, and the crucibles that forge them"-- this identifies
the family, faith organizations, and early years education as sectors of
main interest.** Acting on the created analysis should involve a **shift
away from the current fact-heavy approach, and a greater focus on
"emotion and narrative", where we "start with the emotion and then
follow up with the evidence".** Traditional partners (media, civil
society organizations, and academics) should also be used mainly to
change norms- this might entail a major change in current partner
choices. Also, since social norm shifts are linked to critical
junctures, we should look out for and act quickly when a crisis strikes.

# A couple of questions

## How feasible is it to use family, faith, and teachers as starting points of norm-change programs?

My bet is not very much: religion and family in any society pretty much
mirror the prevailing norms of the society making it hard to use them in
overturning those very norms. This shouldn’t be surprising since
families provide the first and deepest indoctrination into social norms
(particularly the more problematic ones) and these norms in turn draw on
religion to justify themselves. In fact, the current conservative
backlash against public schools in the United States and the resurgence
of the home-schooling movement can be seen as a strong attempt by family
and faith groups to resist an 'indoctrination' in liberal values
including LGBT rights/values. In India, at least, the norms that liberal
movements find most problematic (and would like to change) have either
the implicit or the explicit and support of family and faith groups. In
this scenario, it's not very clear how far family and faith
organizations can take you on the path of norm-change. The ability (and
willingness) of "teachers" to change norms independent of family and
faith organizations is also in question.

## Should aid/dev organizations be the vanguard of norms revolution, or should we pick up the pieces?

Faced with a social norm in need of reform, every government has two
broad options-- go forth with the reform and resist the resultant
backlash (either by reason or force), or wait for the right time and
then push through the reforms. The feasibility of reform and resist in a
fractious democratic polity like India is questionable: in the past
couple of months we have seen a bunch of instances where the reform and
resist tactic has backfired (Jallikettu in Tamil Nadu, and the [33%
reservation for women in Nagaland
legislature](http://indianexpress.com/article/india/opposed-to-33-reservation-for-women-naga-bodies-call-for-boycott-of-civic-polls-4458791/%5D%20for%20women%20in%20Nagaland%20legislature)).
Wait and push approach to reforms are usually dictated by compulsions of
politics or external shocks (a la the 1991 Indian economic reforms)—as
such the final reform could go either way. For example, compare the
legislative track record in the case of the [Roop Kanwar sati incident](http://www.frontline.in/static/html/fl2105/stories/20040312002504600.htm) to
the case of [Shah Bano](http://www.thehindu.com/2003/08/10/stories/2003081000221500.htm).

Aid agencies face similar dilemmas as to what their role in a society
should be. Should they function as "vanguards of revolution" engaged in
a siege at the frontiers of social norms, or should they let other
popular movements (arising organically or otherwise) do the heavy
lifting and then come in to clean up? Green's arguments imply a subtle,
yet perceptible, shift from the former to the latter, because the end
goal that evidence-based aid/dev organizations desire when they bombard
policy makers with "stats and facts" is (whether they realize it or not)
the top-down imposition of policy and invested follow-through, in other
words being the “vanguard”. If aid/dev agencies are to retreat from the
vanguard, where should they draw the line and how long are they willing
to wait-- sati? female genital mutilation? child marriage? In other
words, should aid agencies wait till a large enough organic movement
evolves (with or without their assistance) before applying pressure on
countries to act against patently 'wrong' existing norms?

## What can be done, then?
Pedagogy of the oppressed shows a way. Coming up in Part 2.
